https://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/20190002580.pdf

Liquid Culture:
Mycelium is able to grow on almost any substrate, so long as the substrate contains sufficient nutrients and is not toxic to the fungus. Though various substrates were tested, a standardized substrate is required to observe the growth of mycelium in different conditions. It has also been found that the growth medium of Potato Dextrose Yeast Agar (PDYA) provides the optimal nutrients for mycelium growth,10,11 without providing excessive nutrients that will encourage bacterial growth and contamination. The solid PDYA growth medium used in the lab consisted of 2.0% dextrose, 0.10% potato extract, 0.15% yeast extract, 1% agar, and 96.50% water. When growing the mycelium as a liquid culture, the liquid PDY growth medium is composed of 2.0% dextrose, 0.10% potato extract, 0.15% yeast extract, and 97.50% water. The mycelium can then begin to grow on the PDYA medium by extracting a small piece from the live fungus onto the plate, as shown in Figure 3:

30C optimal to 23, 37

Inocculation:
Our procedure began with the preparation of the substrates for inoculation with mycelium. To begin, we ground the substrate into a loose particles (if it did not come in that form). We then sterilized the substrate and any containers we planned to use with the autoclave.
After the autoclave process was complete we moved the substrate, the containers, sterilized scalpels, Whirlpack® bags which are supplied sterile and sealed, and Petri dishes of mycelium under the laminar flow hood. We then divided the substrate among the Whirlpack® bags. We then sealed the bags and removed them out from under the hood. After removal we weighed the mass of the bags and recorded it on the front of the bag. After re-sterilizing with ethanol, the bags were placed back under the laminar flow hood. We then calculated and added a specific amount of PDY (Potato-dextrose-yeast) to each of the bags containing the substrates (this was done to provide the mycelium with an easy substrate to break down - in the case of Ecovative they used regular flour). We experimented with different ratios between weight and PDY to find the best amount to add - while we were unable to generate a specific ratio by the end of our experimental time frame, the general consensus was the material should be damp but not soaked. Once the PDY is added to the substrate plates of mycelium were added. These plates were first divided into grids before being mixed in with the substrate in the bag. The larger the amount of substrate the larger the number of plates were added.
Once the bags were filled, they were sealed - making sure to leave plenty of air within the bag - and removed from the autoclaves. The bags were then placed in the incubator at 30 °C for 1-2 weeks, depending on the rate of growth of mycelium into the substrate. Once there was a decent amount of mycelium grown the material was remixed under the laminar flow hood, in order to distribute the mycelium more evenly, and then packed into molds (note that some bricks were also grown just leaving the mycelium to grow until the form was filled). These bricks were then left to fit, some in the 30 °C incubator and others in a room temperature growth chamber, for another 1-2 weeks.
Once the mycelium had digested the substrate enough to form a solid block, it was removed from the mold, weighed, and baked at 120 °C for several hours. Once the mycelium block was 30% of its original weight it was considered finished material.
